Servlet:
Request Response Model : A model in which there are two entities involved

1) Requester: One who sends a request.
2) Responser : One who sends a response for the request.

We use web container and web server synonymously
Real World Examples for Request-Response : For ex- Requesting for a webpage(www.google.com) in browser. Your browser is the 
requestor here and response is given by a web server residing somewhere in the network.

Most of the systems run on this model. Other model is Publish/Subscribe(not discussed in this tutorial)

How request reponse works in a web context?

When you type (www.google.com), typically your browser sends a HTTP request to a web server (). A web server is a software 
module which processes the requests coming from clients(in our case typically a browser).

Parts of HTTP request sent by your browser

1) HTTP method (GET,POST,HEAD,DELETE,TRACE etc), most commonly used are GET or POST
2) URL which you want to access (For ex www.google.com)
3) Form Parameters (optional. Passed in HTTP Request header only)
4) Information about the broswer and few other details

GET /index.html HTTP/1.1   (HTTP RequestType  URL  Version of HTTP)
Host: www.ancbn.com         ( Actual hostname)
Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.2; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.22 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/25.0.1364.172 Safari/537.22  (Your web browser info)
Referer: https://www.google.com/     (if the request was forwarded from other site)
Accept-Language: en-US,en;q=0.8      (language your browser accepts)
Accept-Charset: ISO-8859-1,utf-8;q=0.7,*;q=0.3 (charset your browser accepts)

Parts of HTTP response sent by the web server

Response has two parts
1) Header (Status Code,Type of Content,Cookies,TTL)
2) Body (Actual content for the browser use)


1) Status Code (typically 200 if the request was successful or else 404,500 etc)
2) Type of content ( if it is pure text or a file or a image etc)
3) Actual content ( It is part of the HTTP response body) 


What is Servlet?

Servlets are server side programs which are run inside a web container when a HTTP request is sent by any HTTP client (for ex - web browsers).
How to write a Servlet
1) Simply extend the HttpServlet class 

It is recommended not to override the service method present in the HttpServlet class. (You can if you know what you are doing)

Servlet Life cycle
1) Servlet is loaded by the web container when the first request for the servlet comes in.
2) Container calls the init method in the Servlet. (This method is called only once in the whole life cycle of the Servlet)
3) Container calls the service method present in HttpServlet class and determines the type of request (for ex- GET or POST)
4) doGet,doPost etc. methods are called from service method based on type of request. 
5) Whenever a new request comes, if the servlet is already loaded , the container spawns a new thread and the service method of the Servlet is called
6) destroy method is called by the container only once before the servlet is unloaded by the container.

NOTE: destroy method is a normal method which can be called by the developer any number of times but that wont trigger unloading of the servlet.
The container takes that as a normal method call.

Typical process at web container side when a request is received

1) Web Container looks for an URL mapping in web.xml
2) If not found , sends a 404 error to the user else go to Step 3
3) The mapped servlet for the specific URL is loaded in the container (NOTE : Servlet is loaded only once, for subsequent requests same servlet instance is used)
4) Servlets processes the request and forwards the control to another HTML/JSP page.
5) The response is sent back to the browser ( which is typically a HTML page)


Servlet Interface Hierarchy
Read from right to left
Servlet Interface<-- (implements) Generic Servlet (Abstract class) <-- (extends) HttpServlet (Abstract Class) <-- (extends) YourCustomServlet (Concrete Implementation)


Points to Remember
1) There is only one ServletContext object per application
2) There is one ServletConfig object per Servlet/JSP.
3) Generic Servlet is given by Java so that you can handle your own protocol implementations.
4) HttpServlet is only for requests which follow HTTP protocol.
5) Container spawns a new thread of your Servlet for every request and does not create a new instance of Servlet
6) Container other jobs are security,support for other technologies
7) Servlets do have a constructor (Typically not used for any purpose)


Difference between sendRedirect and forward

Send Redirect 													Forward
1) Send Redirect sends a response                               1)Forwards the request to the new servlet   
   back to the browser with a different URL where
   it can get the resource.
2) Send Redirect does not send the previous                     2)we can access both request and response objects
   request object and it is lost
3) Typically used when the resource looking                     3)Typically used when the resource looking for is
   for is available in another web application                     available in the same web application 


Lets try to understand sendRedirect

For ex- Previously Java was owned by Sun Microsystems. So the URL was sun.java.com. Recently, Sun was brought by Oracle. Now, Oracle wants people to use
oracle.java.com. But it has a problem that people still dont know the new URL. Typically , people will still try to open sun.java.com. So in this case, Oracle
what it does is it uses sendRedirect in the web application hosted by Sun Systems. So now when a user try to open sun.java.com, the servlet will do sendRedirect to
oracle.java.com which essentially means that the browser will be informed that the resource it is trying to look is available at a new location oracle.java.com
and the browser sends a new request. Please note that this is transparent to us as users i.e. you as an user will not know that there was redirect which is happening.
Not sendRedirect has network round trip

Example for Forward

For ex- Take a simple Login Application. Now user enters his userID and password. So internally it calls a UserServlet which verifies if the userId and password
is correct or not. Now after verifying , what should the servlet do. Ideally, it has to forward control to some page. Now what could be that page?
1) If user is authenticated, he should be forwarded to HomePage of the application (normally the Homepage is part of the same application)
2) If user is not authenticated , he should be forwarded to error page.



============================

1) How many instances of a servlet are created?
Ans: There is only a single instance which answers all requests concurrently. This saves memory and allows a Servlet to easily manage persistent data.

2) What is deployment descriptor?
Ans: A deployment descriptor is an XML document with an .xml extension. It defines a component's deployment settings.

3) What is pre initialization of servlet?
Ans: A container does not initialize the servlets as soon as it starts up, it initializes a servlet when it receives a request for that servlet first time. This is called lazy loading

4) What is the <load-on-startup> element?
Ans: The <load-on-startup> element of a deployment descriptor is used to load a servlet file when the server starts instead of waiting for the first request.
Note: The container loads the servlets in the order specified in the <load-on-startup> element.

5) Is HTTP a stateless protocol? Yes

6) What is session tracking?
Ans: Session tracking is a mechanism that servlets use to maintain state about a series of requests from the same user (that is, requests originating from the same browser) across some period of time.

7) What are the types of Session Tracking ?
Ans: 1) Cookies
     2) Url Rewriting
     3) Hidden form fields
     4) HttpSession

8) request.getsession() vs request.getsession(true)
Ans: The request.getSession() returns the current HttpSession associated with this request, or if the request does not have a session, creates one new session. 
	There is actually no difference between the request.getSession() method and the request.getSession(true) method.
	getSession(false) will not return a new Session if one does not already exist
